'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "pingus " 6 "21 October 2011" 0.7.5 "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pingus
\- A puzzle game where you have to save penguins 
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBpingus\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[OPTION]\&... [FILE]
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Pingus is a side-scrolling puzzle game where the player has to
guide a group of penguins from the entrance of a level to the
exit, in between the path is blocked by numerous obstacles and
dangers that the player has to overcome by assigning actions to
the penguins.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "GENERAL OPTIONS"
.TP 
-h, --help
Displays this help
.TP 
-V, --version
Print version number and exit
.TP 
-v, --verbose
Enable info level log output
.TP 
-D, --debug
Enable debug level log output
.TP 
-Q, --quiet
Disable all log output
.SS "DISPLAY OPTIONS"
.TP 
-w, --window
Start in Window Mode
.TP 
-f, --fullscreen
Start in Fullscreen
.TP 
-r, --renderer=RENDERER
Use the given renderer, defaults to sdl. Available renderers are:
.RS 
.TP 
sdl
A simple software renderer based on SDL, this
is the default and the safest options.
.TP 
opengl
The OpenGL renderer will use hardware
acceleration to render the graphics, it is much
faster then the SDL renderer and recommended when
the hardware supports OpenGL.
.TP 
delta
The delta renderer uses SDL for rendering and
doesn't use hardware acceleration, it will however
try to increase rendering performance by only re
rendering screen elements that have changed. Using
the delta renderer will disable some effects such
as scrolling background to allow maximum
benefits.
.RE
.TP 
-g, --geometry=WIDTHxHEIGHT
Set the window resolution for pingus (default:
800x600). Note that \*(T<\fB\-\-geometry\fR\*(T> only
applies to the window resolution, for the fullscreen
resolution
use \*(T<\fB\-\-fullscreen\-resolution\fR\*(T>
.TP 
-R, --fullscreen-resolution=WIDTHxHEIGHT
Set the resolution used in fullscreen mode (default: 800x600)
.TP 
--software-cursor
Enable software cursor
.SS "GAME OPTIONS"
.TP 
--no-auto-scrolling
Disable automatic scrolling. Automatic scrolling
will cause the screen to scroll whenever the mouse reaches
the border of the screen. Automatic scrolling will only be
active in fullscreen mode or when mouse-grab is
enabled.
.TP 
--drag-drop-scrolling
Enable drag'n drop scrolling. By default Pingus will
use a rubber-band scrolling where the scroll speed
depends on how far away the cursor is from the position
when the mouse button has been clicked. In drag&drop
mode scrolling will behave more like in traditional GUI
applications such as Gimp, where clicking the scroll
button will 'pick up' the playfield and allow to move it
around till it is released again.
.SS "SOUND OPTIONS"
.TP 
-s, --disable-sound
Disable sound
.TP 
-m, --disable-music
Disable music
.SS "LANGUAGE OPTIONS"
.TP 
-l, --language=LANG
Select language to use with Pingus
.TP 
--list-languages
List all available languages
.SS "EDITOR OPTIONS"
.TP 
-e, --editor
Loads the level editor
.SS "DIRECTORY OPTIONS"
.TP 
-d, --datadir=DIR
Load game datafiles from DIR
.TP 
-u, --userdir=DIR
Load config files and store savegames in DIR
.TP 
-a, --addon=DIR
Load game modifications from DIR. Files in DIR will
be used instead of the files in found in the main datadir
of Pingus, thus allowing to modifications, such as sprites
replacements, additional levels, etc. to the game, without
changing the main data files.
.TP 
--no-cfg-file
Don't read ~/.pingus/config
.TP 
-c, --config=FILE
Read config from FILE
.TP 
--controller=FILE
Uses the controller given in FILE
.SS "DEBUG OPTIONS"
.TP 
--developer-mode
Enables some special features for developers
.TP 
-t, --speed=SPEED
Set the game speed (0=fastest, >0=slower)
.TP 
-k, --fps=FPS
Set the desired game framerate (frames per second)
.TP 
--tile-size=INT
Set the size of the map tiles (default: 32)
.SH "KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS"
.SS GAMEPLAY
All gameplay related keyboard shortcuts are configurable via a
controller config file, see \*(T<\fB\-\-controller\fR\*(T>
and \*(T<\fIcontroller/default.scm\fR\*(T>.
.TP 
W, A, S, D
Scroll in the level
.TP 
Space
Hold to ast-forward
.TP 
P, R
Pause the game.
.TP 
S, F
Advance the game by a single frame.
.TP 
Backspace
Activate armageddon.
.TP 
Escape
Leave the current screen/level.
.SS ENGINE
.TP 
F10
Show/hide the FPS counter.
.TP 
AltReturn, F11
Switch to fullscreen/window mode.
.TP 
Ctrlg
Toggle mouse grab, when active, the mouse can not leave the window.
.TP 
Ctrlo, F5
Show the option menu.
.TP 
F12
Make a screenshot. Screenshots are stored
in \*(T<\fI~/.pingus/screenshots/\fR\*(T>.
.TP 
Ctrlm
Toggle the developer mode, see \*(T<\fB\-\-developer\-mode\fR\*(T>
.TP 
c (only in developer-mode)
Show the collision map overlayed over the regular groundmap.
.TP 
k (only in developer-mode)
Clear the screen for delta mode debugging.
.SH ACTIONS
.TP 
Basher
The Basher will to a horizontal dig, leaving behind it a
tunnel. It is not able to dig through metal.
.TP 
Blocker
The Blocker will stop and stay in position, directing
other penguins to turn around when they reach him.
.TP 
Bomber
The Bomber will blow up on the spot and take a bit of
surrounding ground with it.
.TP 
Bridger
The Bridger will build a small bridge, useful for crossing
small chasm.
.TP 
Climber
The Climber actions allows a Pingu to travel upwards a
vertical wall. Unlike other actions the climber action is
a permanent addition to the Pingus ability.
.TP 
Digger
The Digger will dig a hole into the ground. It can't dig
through metal.
.TP 
Floater
The Floater action will give a penguin a small propeller
that lets him gently glide down from great heights that
would otherwise be deadly.
.TP 
Jumper
The Jumper will let the Pingu do a big leap forward,
allowing him to cross chasm and small vertical obstacles.
.TP 
Miner
The Miner will dig a diagonal hole into the ground.
.TP 
Slider
The Slider will make a tiny leap forward, gliding on its
belly for a short while, allowing the Pingu to make it
through narrow tunnels.
.SH "LEVEL EDITOR"
Pingus comes with a build in level editor. The level editor can
currently be used to edit level files (*.pingus) as well as
prefabricated objects (*.prefabs). Worldmaps (*.worldmap) can
currently not be edited with the editor.
.PP
All Pingus data files, except the sound and images, are raw text
files and can be edited in a text editor if the editor isn't
sufficient.
.PP
If you want to submit a level to be included in the next release
follow the following naming convention:
.PP
\*(T<\fI{theme}{number}\-{nickname}.pingus\fR\*(T>
.PP
Do not use space or uppercase in the levelname and keep the
levelname simple (i.e. \*(T<\fIsnow1\-grumbel.pingus\fR\*(T>
not
\*(T<\fIpingus\-go\-on\-a\-long\-journey\-in\-snowland\-grumbel.pingus\fR\*(T>).
The filename should not reflect the actual level title, it
simply should be unique and not conflict with other peoples
levels. If you plan on building a whole levelset, name the
levels after the levelset.
.PP
To submit a level send it to <\*(T<pingus\-devel@nongnu.org\*(T>>.
.SS PREFABS
A prefab, short for prefabricated object, is a group of
objects that have been combined into a new single object. A
classic case of a prefab would for example be a snowman, it is
build out of multiple smaller snowball objects and then saved
as prefab to allow easy reuse in multiple levels. Unlike
simple object groups, prefab are saved as reference in the
level, thus if the prefab is updated, all levels will see the
change. Like object groups prefabs can be ungrouped to break
them back down to individual objects if individual editing is
needed, they are seizing to be prefabs at that point and
changes to the .prefab file will no longer be reflected in the
level.
.PP
Prefabs behave pretty much like regular levels, to create a
prefab simply start a new level and insert the objects as
usual, unlike regular levels the level size is ignored and
thus you have to place your object around the center of the
levels, marked by a cross, to have the prefab function
properly. To save a prefab as prefab instead of level you have
to append .prefab suffix to the filename.
.PP
Thumbnail generation for prefabs is currently done offline
with the script
\*(T<\fI\&./tools/generate\-prefab\-images.sh\fR\*(T>
available from the Pingus source tree.
.SS "UI QUIRCKS"
The Pingus level editor is best used with a combination of
mouse and keyboard, all essential functions have keyboard
shortcuts.
.PP
Unlike more traditional GUIs, the Pingus editor lacks
scrollbars, so to move around the level or the object list on
the right simply use the middle or right mouse button and
drag&drop the list around.
.PP
Objects from the object list can be inserted into the level by
drag&dropping them over to the level.
.SS "KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS"
.TP 
\fBDelete\fR, \fBBackspace\fR
Delete all currently selected objects
.TP 
\fBA\fR
Select or unselect all objects
.TP 
\fBD\fR
Duplicate the currently selected objects
.TP 
\fBI\fR, \fBK\fR, \fBJ\fR, \fBL\fR
Move the current selection by one pixel, if
\fBShift\fR is held, move it by 32 pixel.
.TP 
\fBPageUp\fR, \fBPageDown\fR
Raise or lower an object
.TP 
ShiftPageUp, ShiftPageDown
Raise or lower an object to the top or bottom
.TP 
\fBR\fR, ShiftR
Rotate an objects 90 degrees, if \fBShift\fR
is held rotate it the other way around
.TP 
\fBF\fR, ShiftV
Flip an object horizontally
.TP 
\fBV\fR, ShiftF
Flip an object vertically
.TP 
\fBB\fR, ShiftB
Toggle the background color to make it easier to see
small pixel errors. If shift is hold the color will be
toggled in the opposite direction.
.TP 
\fB+\fR, \fB=\fR, \fB-\fR
Increase/decrease the repeat value of selected objects,
this will only have an effect on objects having an
repeat value (switchdoors, liquids, ...).
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 1998-2011 Ingo Ruhnke <\*(T<grumbel@gmail.com\*(T>>
See the file AUTHORS for a complete list of contributors.
Pingus comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY. This is free software, and you are
welcome to redistribute it under certain conditions; see the file COPYING for details.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
http://pingus.seul.org
